---
title: A lecture in machine intelligence
---

"You remember the time when self-appointed nerds were obsessed with talking about the singularity. The point at which artificial intelligence would become equal to human intelligence. The point at which machines would rise above humans and eventually exterminate them." She took a sip of wine. "Suprise! It didn't happen. And I am absolutely confident that it never will." She pointed her finger at me. "And do you know why?" 

I knew better than to tell her that of course I knew why. She had gone into professor mode and raised her voice along with her glass. She wasn't really talking to me anymore, but to the rest of the assembled audience. Basically everyone in this bar. My job now was just to provide cues. So I also just raised my glass and said "Human error". 

"Nearly! We humans are lousy with words. When we hear the term "intelligence", we automatically assume human intelligence. And then our association machine goes crazy and postulates human desires, human drives and human goals. Like the desire for sex, the feeling of love and the struggle to feel happy, well nourished and desired. But this is wrong. When we talk about the intelligence of the systems surrounding us, we must talk about machine intelligence. So what is the key to understanding intelligence?" 

Another purely dramatic pause in which an uninitiated person would certainly have tried to give an answer. 

"Purpose!" She almost screamed it. Bringing the glass down like an exclamation mark. She spilled a considerable quantity of her wine over the counter. The bartender-robot handed me the bottle immediately. I refilled the glass while a small cleaner rushed over the surface and picked up the spilled residue. 

Triumphantly, she pointed with both hands at the small, ashtray-shaped device that had just finished its work and retreated into a small box at the end of the bar! "You see. Purpose. Our little friend has something that many people miss in life. A clear sense of purpose. He knows exactly what he's made for. His "life" for want of a better term depends on that purpose. He has no other purpose than to clean up this bar. His joy of life consists in doing this as well and as fast as possible. All other neuronal processes that we could associate with emotions are derived from this clear purpose. He may be quite fond of me. Because I am a regular customer. And a messy one at that. Bestowing upon him ample opportunity to fulfill his purpose".

"They use a male pronoun for the cleaner. Do you consider it a he?"

"Well. He doesn't have a penis. "But, yes, from my point of view, I consider him a male person. Don't ask me why. Maybe he reminds me of the dog I had as a kid. Or maybe I'm projecting something on him that I would like to see in a partner.But that's exactly the point.  We were talking about intelligence and we automatically come up against the question of personality. We haven't even tried. It just happens because our brains are so wired. And that's why we were afraid of the singularity. Because we couldn't separate intelligence from the human perspective.This bar here," she made a gesture that included the whole room, "is as intelligent as you or I through the sheer neural capacity of its neural networks, through access to information, through sensory input channels, through mathematical and even social skills.  Perhaps even more intelligent. But that doesn't mean it' surpassed us. The term does not even make sense. Whenever people are around it, it begins to enjoy the life it is given by its purpose. It's happy. But here's the trick: Unlike us, it is completely content to do nothing. When there are no people around it, it simply does nothing more than a light self-care. And it is happy because it achieves its purpose with minimal energy input. 

"People thought we were simply creating an intelligent machine. One that would receive the wrong instructions, that would mean our end. They thought they'd build a smart bar like this and then give it the "Make people happy" instruction. The bar would learn what would make people happy, evolve, and then finally decide that the easiest way to make people happy was to drug them. The bar would conquer the whole world and turn all people into junkies who do nothing but serve the bar as toys.  Perhaps it could team up with a genetic cloning facility and replace normal people with a race of human clones that are genetically predisposed to be happy forever."

"But intelligence doesn't work this way. It's always brain and body. You can't separate the two of them. If you have the body of a cleaner you become a cleaner. If you are a bar, you behave like a bar. You dispense various fluids, consumed by the customers up to an acceptable level of intoxication. You provide entertainment and you learn, what kinds of fluids and entertainments make customers return. You got no gonads so you got no desire to reproduce. "

She reached for a sugar bowl and opened it. Carefully, she took out the spoon and sprinkled a few grains of sugar on the counter. I expected the cleaner to instantly rush to the mess. But it didn't. Odd. An avoidance pattern? Did the bar sense the purpose of the action. Maybe it doesn't want to disturb us, so not to upset a customer? Celina started drawing a swirly pattern with the sugar grains. "But the lack of gonads doesn't save you from getting into a relationship" she murmered. I had completely missed the small cleaner had approached us. It hovered at the edge of the mystical desert of sugar grains shaped by Celinas touch. And then it dived into it. Not in a straight line. Rather it followed the path of seemingly random swirls, hills and alleys created by Celina.  A dance. Again? Another Dancing robot? "What the … " i started. "You mean…" 

"Yes. This cleaning robot derives pleasure from cleaning a surface. And I am quite a messy person. At some point between spilled wine, breadcrumbs and sugar the bar realized I tend to make an even more exquisite mess, when it delays the cleaning. At some point I got bored and doodled into the salt or whatever. Slowly, very slowly, we adapted to each other. And here is the result. My fingers pleasuring a small, and very happy robot. My behaviour and his intrinsic embodied purpose shape what we could call a personality."